Document how to set up remote clusters across k8s boundaries (#2593)
elastic/cloud-on-k8s: docs/remote-clusters.asciidoc

==== Both clusters are in the same Kubernetes cluster

TBD

==== One of the clusters is not in the same Kubernetes cluster

NOTE: While it is technically possible to configure a remote cluster connection to an Elasticsearch cluster residing in Kubernetes in earlier versions, this guide only covers the setup for Elasticsearch 7.6 and later.  Elasticsearch 7.6 introduces improved support for the indirection introduced by Kubernetes services which significantly simplifies the setup.

You can configure a remote cluster connection to an Elasticsearch cluster managed by ECK from another cluster outside of Kubernetes or hosted in a different Kubernetes cluster as follows.

. Ensure that both clusters trust each others certificate authority.
. Configure the remote cluster connection via the Elasticsearch REST API.

For the purposes of this guide we use the following running example:

* `cluster_one` resides inside Kubernetes and is managed by ECK
* `cluster_two` is not hosted inside the same Kubernetes cluster as `cluster_one` and may even not be managed by an ECK instance

We will configure `cluster_one` as a remote cluster in `cluster_two`.

> ===== Ensure both clusters trust each others certificate authority

Reviewer: There's only two of them though with significant amount of text in between, so I think it might be kind of far apart for bullets, right?

The certificate authority used by ECK to issue certificates for the Elasticsearch transport layer is stored in a secret named `<cluster_name>-es-transport-certs-public`. Extract the certificate for `cluster_one` as follows:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get secret cluster_one-es-transport-certs-public \

> -o go-template='{{index .data "ca.crt" | base64decode}}' > remote.ca.crt

Author: That's the go-template way :-)  I am not aware that it is platform specific.

> -o go-template='{{index .data "ca.crt" | base64decode}}' > remote.ca.crt

Reviewer 2: Indeed! I wasn't paying attention.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes"]
----
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/{eck}
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: cluster_two
spec:
  nodeSets:
  - config:
      xpack.security.transport.ssl.certificate_authorities:
      - /usr/share/elasticsearch/config/other/remote.ca.crt
    count: 3
    name: default
    podTemplate:
      spec:
        containers:
        - name: elasticsearch
          volumeMounts:
          - mountPath: /usr/share/elasticsearch/config/other
            name: remote-certs
        volumes:
        - name: remote-certs
          secret:
            secretName: remote-certs
  version: 7.6.0
----

Repeat the steps with reversed roles adding the CA of `cluster_two` to `cluster_one`.

===== Configure the remote cluster connection via the Elasticsearch REST API

Expose the transport layer of `cluster_one` to `cluster_two` which is residing outside of `cluster_one`'s Kubernetes cluster.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: cluster_one-es-transport
spec:
  selector:
    common.k8s.elastic.co/type: elasticsearch
    elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/cluster-name: cluster_one

>   type: LoadBalancer

Reviewer 3: This will mostly work with cloud providers. I would add a note that it could also be done with an `Ingress` resource.

  ports:
  - protocol: TCP
    port: 9300
    targetPort: 9300

> ----

Author: This will be redundant once we have #2543

Finally configure `cluster_one` as a remote cluster in `cluster_two` via the Elasticsearch REST API:

[source,sh]
----
PUT _cluster/settings
{
  "persistent": {
    "cluster": {
      "remote": {
        "cluster_one": {
          "mode": "proxy", <1>
          "proxy_address": "${LOADBALANCER_IP}:9300" <2>
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
----
<1> setup the remote connection in "proxy" mode as `cluster_two` will connect to `cluster_one` only through the Kubernetes service abstraction and not to individual nodes directly.

> <2> `${LOADBALANCER_IP}` will be the IP address assigned to the `LoadBalancer` configured in the transport service above or it can also be a DNS name depending on your setup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> Replace `${LOADBALANCER_IP}` with the IP address assigned to the `LoadBalancer` configured above. if you have configured a DNS entry for the service, you can use the DNS name instead of the IP address as well.
```

ifdef::env-github[]
****
link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/cloud-on-k8s/master/k8s-remote-clusters.html[View this document on the Elastic website]
****
endif::[]
[id="{p}-remote-clusters"]
=== Remote clusters

The link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/modules-remote-clusters.html[remote clusters module] in Elasticsearch enables you to establish uni-directional connections to a remote cluster. This functionality is used in cross-cluster replication and cross-cluster search.

> When using remote cluster connections with ECK, the necessary setup depends on where the remote cluster is deployed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using remote cluster connections with ECK, the setup process depends on where the remote cluster is deployed.
```

To configure `cluster_one` as a remote cluster in `cluster_two`:

===== Ensure both clusters trust each others certificate authority

The certificate authority (CA) used by ECK to issue certificates for the Elasticsearch transport layer is stored in a secret named `<cluster_name>-es-transport-certs-public`. Extract the certificate for `cluster_one` as follows:

[source,sh]
----
kubectl get secret cluster_one-es-transport-certs-public \
-o go-template='{{index .data "ca.crt" | base64decode}}' > remote.ca.crt
----

You then need to configure the CA as one of the trusted CAs in `cluster_two`. If that cluster is hosted outside of Kubernetes, simply add the CA certificate extracted in the above step to the list of CAs in link:https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/security-settings.html#_pem_encoded_files_3[`xpack.security.transport.ssl.certificate_authorities`]

If `cluster_two` is also managed by an ECK instance, proceed as follows:

Create a secret with the CA certificate you just extracted:
[source,sh]
----
kubectl create secret generic remote-certs --from-file=remote.ca.crt
----

> Use this secret to configure `cluster_one`'s CA as a trusted CA in `cluster_two`:

Reviewer 4: This assumes cluster_two is deployed through ECK, may be worth repeating again.

[source,yaml,subs="attributes"]
----
apiVersion: elasticsearch.k8s.elastic.co/{eck_crd_version}
kind: Elasticsearch
metadata:
  name: cluster_two
spec:
  nodeSets:
  - config:
      xpack.security.transport.ssl.certificate_authorities:

>       - /usr/share/elasticsearch/config/other/remote.ca.crt

Reviewer 4: Double-checking because I have doubts: do we default to appending user-provided config array items with our own managed array items?

Author: Yes we changed this explicitly for this use case to merging behaviour

    count: 3
    name: default
    podTemplate:
      spec:
        containers:
        - name: elasticsearch
          volumeMounts:
          - mountPath: /usr/share/elasticsearch/config/other
            name: remote-certs
        volumes:
        - name: remote-certs
          secret:
            secretName: remote-certs
  version: {version}
----

Repeat the above steps to add the CA of `cluster_two` to `cluster_one` as well.

===== Configure the remote cluster connection via the Elasticsearch REST API

Expose the transport layer of `cluster_one`.

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:

>   name: cluster_one-es-transport

Reviewer 4: the mixed `-` `_` usage looks strange

Author: Good point will change it
